Chapter 1-10
Nick

1. “In the 1500s, Native Americans possessed a wide range of complex cultures.” Each of the following gives evidence to support this statement EXCEPT
   A. the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan
   B. the organization of Inca society
   C. Native Americans’ susceptibility to European diseases
   D. the Mayas’ agricultural system
   E. the Maya calendar

2. Which of the following best describes the way Europeans treated Native Americans in the 1500s and 1600s?
   A. Native Americans were regarded as inferior people subject to Christian domination.
   B. Native American ways of life were respected.
   C. Since nothing of value could be learned or obtained from the Native Americans, Europeans thought it was permissible to exterminate them.
   D. Europeans cultivated good relations with Native Americans and sought to make them economic partners.
   E. Only the English believed that Native Americans should be treated fairly.

3. Which of the following was the LEAST important factor behind European exploration and settlement in the 16th century?
   A. increase in scientific knowledge and technological change
   B. population increase
   C. development of nation-states
   D. competition for trade
   E. religious commitment

4. By the end of the 16th century, all of the following were generally true about Spain’s colonial empire EXCEPT
   A. It was controlled by a bureaucracy in Madrid.
   B. The Roman Catholic Church had great influence.
   C. New universities were spreading education and culture.
   D. Families continued to emigrate from Spain.
   E. Great wealth was being sent back to Spain.

5. The delay in founding English settlements in the Americas was the result of

   A. weak English monarchs
   B. the lack of English territorial claims in the Americas
   C. failure to develop trade with other nations
   D. fear of Spain
   E. religious upheavals in England

6. At the beginning of the 17th century, all of the following factors served to increase the English role in America EXCEPT
   A. defeat of the Spanish Armada
   B. population growth
   C. royal leadership
   D. development of joint-stock companies
   E. emigration for religious reasons

7. The survival of the Jamestown colony can be most directly attributed to the
   A. religious spirit of the settlers
   B. management of the Virginia Company
   C. development of a tobacco industry
   D. location of the settlement
   E. nobles’ diligent search for gold

8. Which of the following sources would be most useful in studying the development of democratic institutions in the early colonial period?
   A. the Edict of Nantes
   B. the first charter of the Virginia Company
   C. Columbus’ journals
   D. the Treaty of Tordesillas
   E. the Mayflower Compact

9. Which of the following statements is the most widely accepted description of Columbus’ accomplishments?
   A. He discovered a New World.
   B. He bears much of the blame for oppressing Native American peoples in North America.
   C. He started a permanent relationship between Europe and the Americas.
   D. He is responsible for most of the problems in the Americas during the colonial period.
   E. His heroic deeds will always be respected by fair-minded American citizens.

10. The issue of religion figured most prominently in the consideration of which of the following?
   A. the settlement of Jamestown
   B. the establishment of Puritan colonies in Massachusetts
   C. France’s Indian policy
   D. discoveries by the Spanish conquistadores
   E. Spain’s support of Columbus’ voyages

11. The issue of religious toleration figured prominently in the founding of colonies by all of the following EXCEPT
   A. James Oglethorpe
   B. Cecil Calvert
   C. Anne Hutchinson
   D. William Penn
   E.  Roger Williams

12. Which of the following accurately describes a problem faced by Virginia in the last decades of the 17th century?
   A. a decline in tobacco production
   B. frequent slave uprisings
   C. the lowering of wages caused by an influx of immigrant
   D. political control by small farmers in the House of Burgesses
   E. conflict between large plantation owners and settlers
on Virginia’s western frontier

13. Which of the following documents would be most useful in examining the origins of constitutional government in colonial America?
   A. the sermons of Puritan ministers
   B. newspaper commentary on the Halfway Covenant
   C. the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut
   D. political tracts concerning the Dominion of New England
   E. the correspondence of Sir Edmond Andros

14. “Puritan intolerance of dissent led to the founding of a number of new colonies.” The founding of which of the following does NOT support this statement?
   A. Providence
   B. Portsmouth (Rhode Island)
   C. Hartford
   D. New Hampshire
   E. New Haven

15. Roger Williams differed from other Puritan ministers in his emphasis on
   A. the study of the Bible
   B. the value of consensus in church meetings
   C. nonviolence
   D. the individual’s private religious conscience
   E. the supreme authority of church leaders

16. Which of the following was NOT a factor in the formation of the New England Confederation?
   A. the problem of defending against Indian attacks
   B. conflicts over colonial boundaries
   C. concern about runaway servants
   D. neglect by the English government
   E. a desire to suppress religious dissent

17. The chief purpose of mercantilist policies was to
   A. help colonies to be self-sufficient
   B. strengthen the economy and power of the parent country
   C. defend the colonies from rival powers
   D. maintain tight control over the tobacco industry
   E. foster stable relations between the Crown and the colonies

18. The acts of trade and navigation had all of the following consequences in the colonies EXCEPT
   A. Colonial manufacturing was limited
   B. Colonial economies were regulated from London
   C. Low prices were charged for English imports
   D. Smuggling became a common practice
   E. New England shipbuilding prospered

19. William Penn’s “Holy Experiment” included all of the following ideas EXCEPT
   A. nonviolence
   B. the Bible as religious authority for all
   C. fair treatment of Native Americans
   D. a refuge for Quakers
   E. religious toleration

20. In the mid-18th century, all of the following were generally true about slavery in the British colonies EXCEPT
   A. Planters thought it provided a more dependable labor supply than other options
   B. There were more slaves than indentured servants in the southern colonies
   C. It was strongly opposed in New England
   D. Slaves accounted for about half the population of Virginia
   E. Colonial laws gave slavery a permanent legal status

21. The Great Awakening was a reaction to
   A. the flood of immigrants
   B. established churches in many of the colonies
   C. churches’ earlier failure to take account of people’s emotional needs
   D. guilt over the evils of slavery
   E. the overly strict teachings of the Church of England

22. Preachers of the Great Awakening focused on the importance of
   A. the consequences of leading a sinful life
   B. the sovereignty and power of God
   C. repenting of one’s sins in order to be saved from eternal damnation
   D. looking to the Bible as the final source of authority
   E. all of the above

23. The Great Awakening had all of the following consequences EXCEPT

   A. reduced competition among Protestant sects
   B. decline in the authority of Protestant ministers
   C. a belief that common people could make their own decisions
   D. increased emotionalism in church services
   E. a feeling of shared experience among colonists in different regions and of different national origins.

24. Which of the following is true of immigration to the colonies during the first half of the 18th century?
   A. Most immigrants settled in New England.
   B. Most immigrants came from continental Europe.
   C. A sizable minority of immigrants had no freedom of choice in coming to the colonies.
   D. The English government tried to discourage immigration.
   E. Most immigrants worked for low wages in cities along the eastern seaboard.

25. In the 18th century, all of the following were generally true about colonial society in America EXCEPT
   A. The English language and English traditions were dominant.
   B. There were few poor people and no real aristocrats.
   C. Voters played an active role in government.
   D.  It was impossible for individuals to better themselves economically or socially.
   E. A degree of religious toleration could be found in each colony.

26. At his trial, John Peter Zenger won acquittal on the grounds that
   A. the king had less authority in the colonies than in England
   B. English law permitted the press almost total freedom
   C. libel laws did not apply to government officials
   D. New York’s governor deserved to be criticized
   E. truth could not be libel.

27. Which of the following did the colonies lack?
   A. an adequate monetary system
   B. good harbors and rivers for transportation
   C. the ability to import goods from England
   D. an adequate supply of slave labor
   E. sufficient markets for colonial timber and naval stores

28. Which of the following statements accurately describes the governments of all 13 colonies in the mid-18th century?
   A. The governor was appointed by the king.
   B. Members of the governor’s council were elected.
   C. The government assisted an established church.
   D. One house of the legislature was elected by eligible voters.
   E. The governor had nearly dictatorial power.

29. “Benjamin Franklin was the epitome of the multitalented colonial American.” Each of the following could be used to support this statement EXCEPT
   A. experiments with electricity
   B. Poor Richard’s Almanack
   C. military leadership
   D. invention of bifocal lenses
   E. founding of a nonsectarian college

30. Which of the following best represents the “new man” described by Crevecoeur?
   A. an indentured servant recently arrived from France
   B. a native-born Pennsylvania merchant
   C. an adult slave on a South Carolina plantation
   D. a German-speaking farmer on the frontier
   E. a royal governor of Virginia

31. Which of the following does NOT express a British criticism of the colonies in 1763?
   A. Samuel Adams and other colonial leaders organized opposition to British authority.
   B. Many colonists showed disloyalty by failing to support the war effort.
   C. The colonial militia was badly trained.
   D. Although the colonies benefited from the British victory, they failed to pay their fair share of war costs.
   E. The Virginians under George Washington disobeyed orders

32. “After the French and Indian War, the British government tried to make Americans pay for British protection in the colonies.” Each of the following supports this statement EXCEPT the
   A. Stamp Act
   B. Sugar Act
   C. Quartering Act
   D. Townshend Acts
   E. Quebec Act

33. Pontiac’s Rebellion was a reaction to
   A. the building of Fort Duquesne
   B. the westward movement of English settlers
   C. French control of the fur trade
   D. the Proclamation of 1763
   E. the outbreak of the French and Indian War

34. Which of the following was NOT a consequence of the Stamp Act?
   A. Delegates from different colonies held a protest meeting in New York.
   B. The Sons of Liberty threatened tax officials.
   C. Colonial war debts were paid.
   D. Colonists boycotted British goods.
   E. London merchants suffered from a reduction in trade.

35. John Dickinson defended the idea of no taxation without representation by arguing that
   A. colonists owed no loyalty to the king
   B. Parliament could not regulate trade
   C. colonists were too poor to be taxed
   D. to tax people without their consent violated English law
   E. colonists did not have to submit to British authority

36. The Townshend Acts provoked all of the following colonial reactions EXCEPT
   A. the Massachusetts Circular Letter
   B. John Dickinson’s Letters From a Farmer in Pennsylvania
   C. the Stamp Act Congress
   D. colonial boycotts of British goods
   E. the Gaspee incident

37. The Boston Tea Party had which of the following causes?
   A. the Boston Massacre
   B. Parliament’s efforts to improve the profits of the British East India Company
   C. the Intolerable Acts
   D. the arguments of the committees of correspondence
   E. the imperial policies of Lord Grenville

38. Which of the following sources would be most useful in studying the philosophical foundations of the American Revolution?
   A. John Dickinson’s Letters From a Farmer in Pennsylvania
   B. Benjamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack
   C. John Locke’s Two Treatises of Government
   D. Jonathan Edwards’ “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God”
   E. the Albany Plan of Union

39. Enlightenment philosophers believed in all of the following ideas EXCEPT
   A. People have the right to revolt against tyranny.
   B. People have rights simply because they are human.
   C. Sovereignty resides with the people.
   D. A fundamental purpose of government is to protect people’s rights.
   E. God is the primary authority for government.

40. Which of the following is a correct statement about the American colonies in the 1770s before the outbreak of the Revolutionary War?
   A. Except for a few radicals, Americans generally accepted the policies of George III’s ministers.
   B. Most Americans resisted the British government’s efforts to impose new taxes.
   C. France encouraged the British colonies to revolt.
   D. Colonial boycotts failed to have an effect on British policy.
   E. The 13 colonies had developed a single policy for dealing with Parliament.

41. Which of the following sources would be most useful in researching a paper entitled “Arguments for Independence, 1776”?
   A. John Dickinson’s Letters From a Farmer in Pennsylvania
   B. ) the Olive Branch Petition
   C. ) John Locke’s Two Treatises of Government
   D. Treaty of Paris (1783)
   E. Thomas Paine’s Common Sense

42. The Battle of Saratoga had all of the following consequences EXCEPT
   A. encouraged the British to grant most of the American demands
   B. persuaded the French to form an alliance with the United States
   C. defeated a British attempt to isolate New England from the other colonies
   D. gave a boost to American morale
   E. caused the British to adopt a different military strategy

43. The First Continental Congress was a reaction to
   A. the Declaratory Act
   B. fighting at Lexington and Concord
   C. passage of the Intolerable Acts
   D. the Boston Massacre
   E. the British tax on tea

44. In his pamphlet Common Sense, Thomas Paine defended the idea of American independence on the grounds that
   A. all men are created equal
   B. Parliament was dictatorial
   C. people should not pledge allegiance to a king and a corrupt government
   D. democratic government of, by, and for the people was the only type based on natural law and reason
   E. liberty belongs to those who fight for it.

45. As a result of the Treaty of Paris, the United States gained all of the following EXCEPT
   A. fishing rights off the coast of Canada
   B. British recognition of U.S. independence
   C. a western boundary on the Mississippi River
   D. the territory of Florida
   E. a peaceful settlement of the Revolutionary War.

46. Which of the following most accurately describes those Americans who fought on the British side in the American Revolution?
   A. They came from all groups and classes.
   B. They were a majority of the population.
   C. They were most numerous in New England.
   D. They were generally identified with the Whig party in England.
   E. They were motivated by a desire for financial gain.

47. Which of the following most accurately describes the change in American public opinion between January 1774 and July 1776?
   A. It changed from a desire for reconciliation to a decision for independence.
   B. Most people favored independence in 1774 but were willing to fight for it only after the Declaration of Independence. 
   C. Loyalists were in the majority both in 1774 and 1776.
   D. By the summer of 1776, only a relatively small number of Americans expressed support for the king’s government.
   E. Military support from France encouraged American Patriots.

48. Statement: “The Articles of Confederation succeeded in guiding the United States through its first
decade.” Each of the following actions supports this statement EXCEPT

   A. Congress regulated interstate trade.
   B. Congress enacted the Land Ordinance of 1785.
   C. Congress enacted the Northwest Ordinance.
   D. The U.S. government signed a favorable treaty of peace.
   E. The U.S. government conducted the war effort that resulted in American independence.

49. Statement: “The new state constitutions enacted during the Revolutionary War reflect the Patriots’ emphasis on individual liberty.” Each of the following actions supports this statement EXCEPT
   A. starting each constitution with a bill of rights
   B. providing for separation of powers to limit abuses
   C. submitting proposed constitutions to the people for ratification
   D. the absence of any provision for the abolition of slavery
   E. providing for separation of church and state

50. Which of the following is a correct statement about the United States at the end of the Revolutionary War?
   A. The central government was stronger than any state government.
   B. Women received greater political rights.
   C. Aristocratic privileges were reduced or eliminated.
   D. Slavery was unchallenged.
   E. Every state adopted the idea of separation of church and state.

51. In the 1780s, all of the following contributed to dissatisfaction with the Articles of Confederation EXCEPT
   A. high taxes levied by the national government
   B. a farmers’ revolt in Massachusetts against the collection of state taxes
   C. states refusing to honor the Treaty of Paris
   D. worthless paper money printed by many states
   E. states restricting trade with one another

52. Which of the following statements accurately describes an argument of the Anti-Federalists?
   A. The Constitution failed to provide for a Supreme Court.
   B. The Constitution lacked a Bill of Rights.
   C. States’ rights were strong enough to limit the central government.
   D. The president’s powers were too limited.
   E. The small states had to be protected from the large ones.

53. “The U.S. Constitution is a bundle of compromises.” Which of the following provisions of the Constitution does NOT reflect support for this statement?
   A. representation in the U.S. House of Representatives
   B. representation in the U.S. Senate
   C. counting a slave as three-fifths of a person
   D. Congress’ power to tax imports but not exports
   E. a national court system separates from the legislature

54. In his interpretation of the Constitutional Convention, the historian Charles Beard focused on the importance of
   A. sectional differences
   B. conflict over slavery
   C. economic interests of a wealthy elite
   D. political factions from colonial times
   E. the genius and wisdom of the framers

55. In 1788, the Federalists promised to add a bill of rights to the Constitution in order to
   A. protect their own liberties from possible abuse by the U.S. government
   B. persuade state conventions to ratify the Constitution
   C. ensure that government would be democratic
   D. establish a popular platform for the election of George Washington
   E. expand the rights of women

56. Alexander Hamilton’s financial program consisted of all of the following EXCEPT
   A. the creation of a U.S. bank
   B. the collection of a federal excise tax on whisky
   C. payment of state debts by the federal government
   D. payment of subsidies to farmers
   E. tariffs to protect infant U.S. industries

57. Which of the following was the underlying cause of the other four?
   A. the Jay Treaty
   B. the French Revolution
   C. the XYZ Affair
   D. Citizen Genet controversy
   E. Washington’s Proclamation of Neutrality

58. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions presented the argument that
   A. states had the power to organize political parties
   B. Congress had no power to legislate on questions of immigration
   C. states could nullify acts of Congress
   D. Congress should consult the states before declaring war
   E. the Constitution should be amended

59. The decline in support for the Federalist party can be traced most directly to its handling of the issue of
   A. the Bill of Rights
   B. the XYZ Affair
   C. Citizen Genet
   D. the Alien and Sedition acts
   E. Marbury v. Madison

60. Which of the following was NOT a significant consequence of the election of 1800?
   A. Thomas Jefferson became president.
   B. The Democratic-Republicans took control of Congress.
   C. The Twelfth Amendment was added to the Constitution.
   D. The U.S. government gave less attention to foreign affairs.
   E. The party in power left office peacefully.

61. Which of the following leaders is INCORRECTLY paired with a notable event or deed?
   A. Thomas Jefferson—Louisiana Purchase
   B. Andrew Jackson—Battle of New Orleans
   C. Tecumseh—Battle of Tippecanoe
   D. Henry Clay—declaration of war in 1812
   E. Alexander Hamilton—Embargo Act of 1807

62. Thomas Jefferson’s revolution of 1800 changed the Federalist policies of Washington and Adams in all of the following areas EXCEPT
   A. size of the military
   B. number of federal employees
   C. amount of national debt
   D. foreign affairs
   E. Alien and Sedition Acts

63. Which of the following accurately characterizes the foreign policy goals of Jefferson and Madison before 1812?
   A. strengthen U.S. trade relations with Britain and France
   B. maintain U.S. neutral rights without going to war
   C. seek an alliance with either Britain or France
   D. explore various means for acquiring Canada
   E. provide aid to independence
movements in Latin America

64. John Marshall’s Supreme Court decision in the case of Marbury v. Madison established
   A. a means for installing Federalist judges in office
   B. rules for impeachment trials
   C. the principle of judicial review
   D. the federal government’s authority over the states
   E. a procedure for reviewing treaties

65. Native Americans in the West allied themselves with the British in the War of 1812 because they
   A. wanted to stop American settlers from taking their lands
   B. were persuaded to do so by Aaron Burr
   C. had ambitions to establish an Indian confederacy
   D. had always been friendly with the British
   E. had signed a binding treaty with Britain during the American Revolution

66. Thomas Jefferson’s chief reason for purchasing Louisiana was to
   A. challenge Hamilton’s loose interpretation of the Constitution
   B. challenge Napoleon’s bid for world empire
   C. give the United States control of the Mississippi River
   D. provide a rationale for the Lewis and Clark Expedition
   E. strengthen the Republican party in the trans-Mississippi West

67. All of the following contributed to the U.S. decision to go to war in 1812 EXCEPT
   A. the election of war hawks to Congress in 1810
   B. a desire to acquire parts of Canada
   C. British impressment of American seamen
   D. efforts to protect the land of Native Americans
   E. American sympathy with France against Britain

68. Which of the following documents or sources would be most useful for analyzing the effects of the Embargo of 1807 on the U.S. economy?
   A. Jefferson’s instructions to Lewis and Clark
   B. resolutions of the Hartford Convention
   C. records of shipbuilding activity in a New England state from 1805 to 1810
   D. financial accounts of Georgia plantations from 1805 to 1807
   E. speeches of Henry Clay (1810–1812)

69. The War of 1812 had all of the following consequences in the United States EXCEPT
   A. acquisition of new land
   B. Native Americans’ loss of Britain as an ally
   C. the demise of the Federalist party
   D. an increase in U.S. manufacturing
   E. an increase in American nationalism

70. The Hartford Convention had longterm significance because it
   A. encouraged Britain to sign the Treaty of Ghent
   B. presented a major challenge
to Madison’s domestic policies
   C. forced repeal of the Embargo Act of 1807
   D. marked the end of the
Federalists as a national party
   E. organized national opposition to the War of 1812

71. Which of the following statements accurately describes the Monroe Doctrine?
   A.  It caused an immediate change in the U.S. role in world affairs.
   B. It asserted the U.S. right to send troops into the countries of Latin America to provide political stability.
   C. It declared U.S. opposition to European intervention in the affairs of independent countries of the Western Hemisphere.
   D. It was fully supported by the British government.
   E. It established the U.S. claim to being a world power.

72. The map shows the United States directly after the
   A. Louisiana Purchase
   B. War of 1812
   C. Rush-Bagot Treaty
   D. Florida Purchase
   E. Missouri Compromise

73. Which of the following increased southern planters’ reliance on slaves?
   A. Missouri Compromise
   B. invention of the steamboat
   C. invention of the cotton gin
   D. Lowell System
   E. Louisiana Purchase

74. The Erie Canal was significant because it
   A. challenged railroads as the primary transportation system of the early 1800s
   B. tied the manufacturing of the East to the farming of the West
   C. was the first federally funded internal improvement
   D. stimulated subsistence farming and manufacturing in the West
   E. increased trade with Great Britain

75. A major effect of John Marshall’s Supreme Court decisions was to
   A. expand federal power and limit the states’ power
   B. expand the states’ power and limit federal power
   C. declare federal laws to be unconstitutional
   D. protect and enlarge the jurisdiction of state courts
   E. legitimize a strict interpretation of the U.S. Constitution

76. Henry Clay’s idea of an American System included all of the following EXCEPT
   A. protective tariffs
   B. internal improvements
   C. state banks
   D. increased trade between all sections of the country
   E. federal funds for a national transportation system

77. Which of the following is a correct statement about the United States at the beginning of the Era of Good Feelings?
   A. Sectionalism had become the dominant force in the nation.
   B. There were no more divisions within the ranks of the Republican party.
   C. Sectionalism had become the dominant force in the Federalists and Republicans united on an economic program of internal improvements and protective tariffs.
   D. Friendliness and cooperation with Britain replaced earlier policies of hostility.
   E. Nationalism strongly influenced American culture and politics.

78. Which pair of issues aroused the most controversy in 1819 and 1820?
   A. internal improvements and Latin American independence
   B. slavery in Missouri and Latin American independence
   C. slavery in Missouri and a financial crisis
   D. Monroe’s prospects for reelection and a financial crisis
   E. Monroe’s prospects for reelection and the protective tariff

79. Which of the following best describes changes in the American economy in the 1820s?
   A. improved transportation in the
West, depressed conditions in the South
   B. industrialization in the
Northeast, diversified farming in the South
   C. improved transportation in the
West, industrialization in the North
   D. cotton farming in the South depressed conditions in the North
   E. railroads in all sections providing the primary stimulus for economic growth

80. In the first decades of the 19th century, the Industrial Revolution in the United States was supported by developments in all of the following areas EXCEPT
   A. the factory system
   B. transportation
   C. corporations
   D. mechanical inventions
   E. crafts unions

81. In the 1830s and 1840s, all of the following were generally true about immigration EXCEPT
   A. Most immigrants came from the British Isles and northern Europe.
   B. Improvements in ship technology made the ocean voyage relatively cheap and fast.
   C. The South attracted the least number of immigrants.
   D. An overwhelming majority of native-born Americans welcomed the immigrants as a cheap source of labor.
   E. Poorer immigrants lived in the cities while those with some money farmed in the West.

82. During the 1840s, large numbers of Irish immigrated to the United States mainly because of
   A. British persecutions in Ireland
   B. U.S. policies offering free land
   C. support from the Irish-American Aid Society
   D. the development of textile mills in New England
   E. famine resulting from the failure of the potato crop

83. Nativist reaction to immigration resulted in
   A. the formation of the Know-Nothing party
   B. the splitting of the Democratic-Republican party
   C. major changes in the immigration laws
   D. increased immigration from southern Europe
   E. greater sectional differences between North and South

84. All of the following restricted the growth of labor unions before the Civil War EXCEPT
   A. increased numbers of immigrant workers
   B. economic depressions
   C. opposition by factory employers
   D. opposition by southern plantation owners
   E. judicial decisions

85. Twenty years after the ratification of the U.S. Constitution, Congress prohibited
   A. slavery in all U.S. territories
   B. slave ownership by federal employees
   C. immigration
   D. importation of slaves into the United States
   E. efforts to change naturalization laws

86. Which of the following activities was most commonly practiced by African Americans as a means of resisting slavery in the early 1800s?
   A. sitdown strike
   B. legal action
   C. political action
   D. armed revolt
   E. work slowdown

87. Before the Civil War, which of the following groups of southern whites did NOT defend slavery?
   A. Methodist congregations
   B. farmers
   C. poor whites
   D. large landowners
   E. mountain people

88. Before 1860, the change that most influenced the lives of Native Americans on the Great Plains was
   A. the introduction of the horse
   B. the building of a transcontinental railroad
   C. sectional tensions between North and South
   D. immigration
   E. the establishment of reservations

89. Which of the following regions is INCORRECTLY paired with an economic or social characteristic?
   A. Old Northwest—agriculture
   B. New England—factory system 
   C. western frontier in 1850— tobacco farming
   D. Deep South—cotton farming
   E. border states—slavery

90. Which of the following is a CORRECT statement about the United States in 1850?
   A. The vast majority of Native Americans lived west of the Mississippi River.
   B. A majority of Americans lived in cities.
   C. All free African Americans lived in the North.
   D. Most industrial workers were protected by laws providing for an eight-hour day.
   E. The Mississippi River defined the western frontier.

91.  Jacksonian Democrats favored all of the following EXCEPT 
   A. rotation in office
   B.  universal suffrage for white males
   C.  the caucus system of nominating candidates
   D.  rewarding political supporters with government jobsFrom Neutrality to War, 1939–1941
   E.  presidential electors being chosen by popular vote

92.  After the election of 1824, the president’s choice of Henry Clay as secretary of state resulted in
   A.  the end of political bitterness between the major parties
   B.  the revival of the Federalist party
   C.  widespread criticism of the spoils system
   D.  charges of a corrupt bargain with John Q. Adams
   E.  a political alliance between Clay and Andrew Jackson

93.  An important effect of the tariff of abominations of 1828 was
   A.  increased prices for cotton overseas
   B.  South Carolina’s adoption of the theory of nullification
   C.  the election of a Democratic president, Andrew Jackson
   D.  an alliance of northeastern workers and western farmers
   E.  the growth of manufacturing in the South

94.  The Revolution of 1828 revealed that political power was
   A.  shifting to the western states
   B.  shifting to the southern states
   C.  entrenched on the eastern seaboard
   D.  gravitating toward conservative elements
   E.  evenly divided between Whigs and Democrats

95.  Which of the following documents would be most useful in evaluating President Jackson’s commitment to democratic values?
   A.  the Specie Circular
   B.  veto message on the re-chartering of the Second Bank of the United States
   C.  congressional hearings on the“corrupt bargain”
   D.  Supreme Court cases on the Indian-removal issue
   E.  Calhoun’s writings on nullification

96.  In the 1830s, the factor that most directly promoted the development of a two-party system was
   A.  the growth of the immigrant population
   B.  increased interest in foreign affairs
   C.  changes in methods of nominating and electing the president
   D.  increasing sectional conflict between northern and southern states over the tariff issue
   E.  the dropping of constitutional limitations on the party system

97.  “The duties of all public officers are, or at least admit of being made, so plain and simple that more is lost by the long continuance of men in office than is generally to be gained by their experience.” This statement best reflects the views of
   A.  John C. Calhoun
   B.  Daniel Webster
   C.  John Q. Adams
   D.  Andrew Jackson
   E.  Henry Clay

98.  The main issue in the presidential campaign of 1832 was
   A.  the recharter of the Bank of the United States
   B.  the removal of Native Americans from eastern states
   C.  the use of federal funds for internal improvements
   D.  the cost of western lands sold by the government
   E.  the nullification of the “tariff of abominations”

99.  President Jackson’s response to Supreme Court decisions on the treaty rights of Native Americans resulted in which of the following?
   A.  Jackson’s loss of popularity among working-class voters
   B.  Indian uprisings in the eastern states
   C.  the division of tribal lands into family units
   D.  impeachment of the president for not enforcing the law
   E.  the forced removal of Cherokees from their lands in Georgia

100.  Supporters of the Whig party included all of the following groups EXCEPT 
   A. supporters of Clay’s American System
   B.  new immigrants, such as the Germans and the Irish
   C.  westerners who wanted federal funds for internal improvements
   D.  reformers concerned about immorality and vice
   E.  advocates of a national bank

